Okay, welcome back.
Now we are on the seventh verse of the
the last preliminary practice, right?
It says,
bound themselves in the prison of
samsara.
What worldly protectors have the ability
to protect you?
Question mark. Therefore,
seeking refuge in those who do not
deceive the three jewels is the practice
of bodhicattas.
So this seventh verse talks about the
importance of seeking true refuge in the
three jewels.
Um
so taking refuge is the
seven the preliminary practice here.
Um and the first line
here bound themselves in the prison of
samsara. what worldly protect what
worldly protectors have the ability to
protect you.
This line is um
primarily directed to those born in
Tibet.
Uh many Tibetans take um worship in
local sort of how do I say local gods
associate with the beautiful mountains
or special trees or special water where
Naga kins you know live and so forth.
So these
local gods are worldly. We call world
not we don't call gods but we call
worldly protectors.
So these worldly protectors are
spirits who are still part of samsara
part of samsara that's why we call
worldly protectors
um who have not attained liberation
enlightenment
so they are unable to protect you
and un
they're um un unreliable
sources of protection. So worldly
protectors cannot offer the true refuge
that leads to
uh liberation from the suffering of
samsara.
So there are also some religions
that have the practice of u animal
sacrifices
to sort of gain success.
They believe that uh
the bigger the sacrifice,
the larger the animal, the better it
will burn. lack and success.
So those kind of protectors who
um
rely on harmful practices
are not true refuge.
So in Buddhism,
true protectors
uh would never
encourage actions that harm others.
They guide others towards liberation
through generosity,
compassion,
wisdom,
nonharm.
So taking refuge is an essential
foundation of all Buddhist teachings
because
you know in our lives there are a lot of
obstacles, a lot of uh confusion
and um a great deal of um suffering and
unhappiness.
So the reason going for refuge is
uh essential is we need some sort of
reliable method that will lead to the
enlightenment.
um and uh the um
uh the uh elimination of um all these
obstacles
um in our lives.
So going for refuge in the three jewels
means
accepting the Buddha as
our teacher, Dharma as our path,
Sana as our friends.
So
that's enough.
We
just rely on Buddha
as our teacher, as our deity, as our
everything. And then dharma is just a
really clear path.
And then in order to journey on that
path, we need some good friend so that
when we have a hard time, they can help
us.
That's all we need. No other everything.
Every everything
includes Buddha Dharma Sana. Right? So
this seven this is the seven seventh
preliminary practice which is taking
refuge in three jewels purely
from your bottom of your heart.
So you don't need worldly protectors.
You don't need anything else. Just three
jewels. How simple.
Okay,
that's easy. So I don't have to explain
all. Now the next eighth verse is
the Buddha taught that all the
unbearable suffering of bad rebirths is
the result of negative karma. Thus even
at the risk of your life never
committing negative actions is the
practice of bodhic sattas.
So now here we finished the seven topics
of the preliminary section.
Now from here
on is the main teaching section of the
the text. Uh this section is again
divided into three sections.
The path for lesser individual,
the path for the middle individual
and the path for greater individual.
So the path for the lesser level
individual is um discussed in this verse
which is negative actions bring
unhappiness
into their life or
in other words karma right karma and
effect.
The focus of this level of the path is
the realization that
what we do in this life will cause the
experience of our future lives. So we
should never commit negative actions
even
at the risk of our lives. So when we
talk about the power of cause and karma,
if we do not value causing karma, cause
and effect,
our actions of body, speech and mind
will lack discipline.
The Buddha taught that the unbearable
suffering of this life is the result of
wrongdoing in the past.
Past in this life or past in past life.
Right? So therefore we should never
commit negative actions.
If we don't believe
in the principle of cause and effect
then we will continue to engage in
negative actions. So therefore this
verse is uh is a reminder for us to
deeply believe in cause and effect cause
and karma right so that we will not
commit negative actions in the future.
So this is the first step and one of the
most important practice of bodhic
sattvas and um
um the followers of the bodhicatta path.
So the goal of the lesser individual is
to avoid
experiencing the suffering of samsara.
That's why this verse encourages
practitioners to avoid harmful actions
and believe that cause and result are
essential for their own future
happiness.
It says here even at the risk of your
life never commit negative actions.
So all the
bodhic sattvas in the past treat all
these um those who harm them
with the practice of patience.
Maybe you know we are not there yet but
if we practice bodhic chitta
uh even if we cannot do the same as the
bodhic sattvas
we should still be able to
understand that we need to eliminate
negative actions and we cannot let anger
generate in our Mind
anger ruins our love and compassion and
bodhicitt. Right?
And then the next the ninth verse.
The pleasure of the three rounds is like
dew drops on the tips of grass.
Its nature makes it evaporate in a
single moment.
The internal supreme state of liberation
striving for that is the practice of
bodhicatt.
Um in the last verse we um discussed the
importance of um
deeply believing in cause and uh result
to avoid
um falling into samsara.
The middle level individuals
don't wish to just
temporarily free themselves from the
suffering of samsara but they wish to
achieve
complete and lasting sort of lasting um
liberation.
The path for the middle level
individuals is discussed in this this
verse. Okay. So this verse reflects on
the uh nature of worldly pleasures and
the value of
striving for liberation.
So the pleasure of the three realms is
like it says dew drops on tips of grass.
The three realms refers to the desire
realm, human realm, right? This human
realm, desire,
the then the form realm
we call God's God's realm
and then the formless realm. formless
realm. This is the also another
god god realm
but different kinds of gods you know. So
this is the this is the highest of the
three realms.
So in Buddhism only
beings who have attained
very deep levels of formless
meditate uh absorb absorption are reborn
here.
So don't meditate on shamata alone for
your whole life.
If you do that you are reborn in this
realms.
While in this state you are not
experiencing suffering
but you also do not have liberation.
This state is um impermanent
and
the ground of the afflictions is still
there
and can be experienced again once you
come out of this uh meditative state.
So if you remember
in Buddha's life
before he become
enlightened
uh he reached this state of meditation
but he knew
one of his his teacher said oh you are
there now
I remember in the sutra I said you know
this teach his teacher say I'm very old
now. So I'm going to die. So you should
keep my position
and you are there no more.
And Buddha meditate and meditate and no
this is this is not liberation.
And Buddha knew it wasn't complete
liberation.
So he continued his journey
until attend enlightenment.
Yeah. If you meditate only shamata
alone
this is a problem.
One time Ken Panzo said you know one of
the the first anom which is
uh he let you meditate shamata for seven
years shamata only shamata for seven
years then when you're done then he will
give you the next meditation
said panzo said he know he knows that
how long how long you have like your
life.
So he said I don't know. So I will not
let you meditate only and meditate
shamata alone for 7 years. If you died
while you're meditating shamata you're
going to reborn this kind of realms form
for form form realm or form list realm.
It's hard to say this verse words.
So you know say I don't know how much
you have time. So I will give you you
should practice shamata like 3 months
and then we'll go to next.
Anyway,
so this verse says the pleasure of the
three realms is like a dew drops on tips
of grass.
That means happiness of the three realms
is impermanent.
It doesn't last very long. It's like a
dew drops on the tip of grass, right?
Meaning, you know, it it it disappears
very quickly when the sun comes out.
Done.
So as long as we take rebirth based on
the three negative emotions, there's no
everlasting happiness according to
Buddhism, you know.
So if we look for happiness and joy
based on attachment and desire,
that type of joy and pleasure is
temporary
because when we
expect happiness out of attachment
and pleasures, we will end up uh um
disappointed.
So all worldly pleasures are
you know interesting in the beginning
but um at the end they bring
unhappiness.
So this is like if we have uh sort of
teachers say like very itchy skin,
scratching the skin brings
temporarily
happiness, relief, right? But at the end
it gets worse.
So the Buddha and Bodhi sattas do not
expect happiness out of worldly
pleasures.
The bottom line is our happiness is
under the control of other forces. So we
really don't own that happiness until we
achieve the everlasting happiness of um
enlightenment.
There is a beautiful tasure song by
Kimu.
I say
it says there is no Buddha
who possess attachment.
Listen carefully.
There is no Buddha who possess
attachment. Understand?
Okay. However, that attachment itself is
the Buddha.
What? Yep.
[Music]
There is no Buddha who possess
attachment. However, that attachment
itself is the Buddha.
So when you think about it meaning it
seems like a contradiction at first
but if you recognize the nature of your
afflictions
that is no different than the Buddha.
So human life is
relatively free and happy
compared with uh sort of other realms
but still does not give us complete
freedom
and confidence.
So we have pleasures
and happy moments but if we expect too
much and are attached to those pleasures
we will suffer.
It's because this life is still not free
from suffering. Even if we have been
born as a human being have this a
precious life.
So in this verse you know the worldly
enjoyments are pleasurable in the
beginning but um as time goes on they
become an sort of increasing
source of worries and they bring a lot
of u unhappiness.
So teachers say that it's like um
it's like uh wrapping a piece of wet
leather around your your wrist.
It's fine at first, right? But as the
leather dries and shrinks,
it tightens painfully.
So worldly pleasure is like that.
So the message in this verse is not to
put your hope in trying to achieve
happiness within samsara
but to put your efforts into achieving
unchanging happiness
which in Buddhism is the changeless
state of enlightenment liberation. Okay,
now the next 10th verse.
[Music]
Y
from beginning this time your mothers
have cherished you. If they now suffer,
what good is your own happiness? Thus
for the sake of liberating
limit
limitless sentient beings generating
bodhicitta is the practice of bodhic
sattvas.
This section and verse is on the
practice of the
path for great level of individuals
or those engaged in the practice of
Mahayana. Remember there are three
verses lesser individual middle
individual. This is the um greatest
level of individual
because their motivation for practice is
is I will not only save myself but I
will protect all beings.
I will help all beings achieve a state
of everlasting happiness because each
and every being has the desire to be
happy. But for the most part, no one
really
knows how to achieve genuine happiness.
because of that even if we succeed in
achieving a temporary state of happiness
that turns into suffering.
So if we recognize this basic situation
of life then through this recognition we
will begin to uh create the actual
heartfelt
desire to help each other.
So that kind of uh awakening
of the wish for the happiness of others
is the beginning of what is called
bodhicitta.
Okay. This bodhicitta is the most
important aspect of the training of
bodhic sattvas.
If bodhicitta is present
that person is called the bodhic sattva
right.
The 37 practice of bodhic sattvas
primarily focus on bodhicitta
and the bodhic sattva path.
So from here on he talks about
bodhicitta.
Because now we are on the greatest level
of individual path and practice. So if
we don't reflect on bodhicitta,
there will be no way to practice the
Mahayana uh Buddhism purely.
Now
from where does bodhichata arise?
It arises from the heart of benefiting
others.
So the first two lines of this verse
explain the
interconnectedness of all beings
and the fundamental reason why it is
important to generate bodhicitta.
So how should we repay kindness of
mothers?
Parents I mean mother means parents.
Okay.
This situation
creates the motivation and desire
to benefit all beings.
So bodhic chitta is definitely
about
changing our mental attitude.
In Tibetan we say sim
simit
sim means mind
kit means kit means extent.
make bigger.
So we need to extend our mind because
the room in our mind is sometimes so
small right that even we ourselves
cannot even be there.
So we must expand our mind by
understanding how important happiness is
for all sentient beings.
So we have to practice bodhicitta
to
extend or expand our mind.
But before practicing,
we must know how important
happiness is for all sentient beings.
Not not only for ourselves
but all sentient beings.
That's that's that's the main thing.
Once you understand that bodhicitta will
come.
So in Buddhism the best way to take care
of yourself is uh to take care of
others.
Buddha believes that.
Shanda says the Buddha became Buddha by
taking care of others.
to understand that is clearly how it is
cultivating
profound compassion and wisdom for the
benefit of all beings. Right? What is
both characteristic of bodhicitta? Two,
wisdom and compassion.
That's what we call bodhicitta.
So cultivating profound compassion,
profound wisdom
for the benefit of all beings. And that
long journey of sort of caring for
others is what made him become a Buddha.
So the desire to benefit all beings is
an um expression of uh
compassion.
Generating bodhicitta
involves
cultivating a heartfelt wish to achieve
liberation for all mother sentient
beings. Okay.
So that's the meaning of this verse.
Now the next 11th verse is
this is very
easy.
All suffering comes from the wish for
your own happiness.
The perfect Buddhas are born from the
intention to benefit others. Thus,
exchanging your own happiness for the
suffering of others is the practice of
body satas.
Oh, beautiful.
This verse is related to the path of the
bodhic satta, right? someone who seeks
liberation not just for themselves but
for the benefit of all beings. So this
verse means that usually
um whatever we say um we are only
thinking about our own happiness. Is
that true?
All the time we don't really care
whether others are happy or not. most
you know um through this sort of selfish
intention we create negative um
accumulations.
It's like
it's like snow in winter time. snow
falling continuously without any
interruption
and this continues to accumulate very
thick snow right and it prevent
beautiful things from growing in the
ground.
So bodhicitta
bodhic
sattvas believe that self centered
desire for personal happiness
um often lead to unhappiness
and uh shanda said that you should
regard all others like yourself
and regard yourself and the situation of
others.
So this verse deals with uh how
bodhicitta is cultivated in your
meditation practice.
So what we need to do
at the present moment is
experience a total change of attitude.
So we must realize as long as we are
trying to achieve
our own happiness
regardless of what we do to accomplish
this uh it will never work if we harm
others for our own happiness.
So the cause of our own happiness is to
benefit others.
Whoever generates the heart of
benefiting others can become a bodhic
satta
because this this um heart of bene
benefiting other is heart of u bodhic
sattvas. So here it says exchange your
own happiness for the suffering of
others.
This doesn't you know literally mean
taking
on others suffering or abandoning
all your personal wellbe.
Instead it refers to mental exchange.
Okay.
It's like a tonlin meditation. Do you
understand? Giving taken meditation.
Your mental exchange.
Visualize
taking in the suffering of others and
giving them your um
own joy, peace, happiness.
So through this sort of method, through
this training
uh mental exchange
practitioners will be able to get rid of
selfishness
and cling into personal desires.
So
how do we develop the ability to do this
exchange?
So begin by visualizing
according to the instructions on toning.
Okay. The practice of uh uh giving and
taking, right?
Taking and giving meditation is a
practice
uh to increase your love and compassion.
Exchanging self and others
doesn't mean I become you, you become me
or I put you in my house and give
everything to you
and I become a homeless person.
Not like that, right? It means instead
of uh working just for my own benefit,
I know exchange that
and work for the benefit of others.
Much to said uh some another his
teaching
if you don't take the suffering of all
beings on your shoulders
what's the use of receiving all the
Mahayana teachings.
So in short bodhichata is the source of
all happiness.
So
verses 10 and 11
instruct us on ways to generate this
powerful bodhicitta mind. Okay,
[Music]
just you should
study um go back and think about these
verses again.
Now the next verse is
even if someone driven by great desire
steals all your wealth
or incite someone else to steal it.
dedicating to this person your body
possessions and all your virtues of the
three times is the practice of bodhic
sattas.
Now a little bit um difficult to you
know this is difficult to practice
that's why this is called the greatest
level of individuals practice.
This is difficult to practice if it
really happens to us,
right? Because normally when someone
steals something from us, uh we become
very upset, angry,
but this verse instruct us to do the
opposite.
So you might think when you hear this
verse, are you kidding?
That's not fair. It's impossible.
But if this happened to bodhic sattas,
they're
they're not only to let the person get
away with it. But um they can dedicate
everything to that person.
It happened.
If you are a great bodhic sattva
and someone wants to take your life,
you can give it
unconditionally.
That's because of a real a real bodhic
satta can see this person lost control
of their mind and out of anger harm
others. So bodhic sattas feel great
compassion for that person
that bodhic sattas have the capacity
to see the situation
as in an opportunity
to practice patience generosity and
compassion.
Oh, this is a good opportunity to
practice to to develop my bodhic jetta.
There are many stories of how people
came to the dharma as a result of u
having been harmed by others
like you know malaria is a great
example. Malariba. You know Malaria?
Okay.
He left his home and practiced
with his teacher for many years, right?
And then
one night he had a very emotional
dream about his mother.
In the morning he wanted to see his
teacher. He was in the cave practicing
but
wanted to ask his teacher to go home.
And then when he saw his teacher in the
morning
his teacher Marbaloa was um sleeping
and there was a sun shining on his
teacher's head.
from the windows, right? And when he
woke up,
he asked him, "I can I go home?
I had this vivid dream last night and I
really want to see my mother."
And then his teacher said, "You see,
when you came here, I was sleeping. That
means we will not see each other after
you go home.
But the good thing is there was a
sunlight on my head
that means your practice will go well
and you will be my lineage holder.
So he said yes you can go home but I
don't think you will see your mother.
uh everything is impermanent. So he left
and when he arrived home everything was
gone everything.
And his mother had died.
Then maybe you know this there's a
beautiful emotional kind of song.
He sung uh he sang a song about
impermanence.
something like um when the house is
there the honor is gone.
When the honor um then when the honor
comes back
the house is falling apart.
Even though both are together meaning
the honor and house are together there
is no essence
only practicing the dharma is
meaningful.
Um
when
mother was alive
son is gone. The son when son comes back
the mother died even though both are
together there is no essence
only practicing the dharma is meaning
something like that he sounds beautiful
things and then his sister also wonder
right the raja know
so when his sister when he sounds like
yeah when sister was there
The brother is gone. The brother comes
back his the sister is no longer there.
Even though both are together, what is
the essence?
Only practicing the dharma is
meaningful. So then he just saying that
and then he went back to the cave and
meditate you know
and then also after that he met his aunt
and uncle who destroyed his families
right wealth because they
took everything
so this time they also wanted uh
Malaria's farm they they have a farm. Uh
you can go there still that all is there
in Tibet
and you know Meriva give his farm to his
uncle and aunt and um dedicated instead
of getting angry.
So if this happened to us, we may not
have the capacity to handle it in such a
way.
But we as as Mahayana practitioners
should be able to handle sim similar
kind of smaller situations, right?
Anyway,
body suffers are amazing. Is it
What makes your body suffer? Body cha.
Never forget that.